README.md, before:

# Jarvis - Personal AI Assistant

A minimal, production-ready personal AI assistant built with self-hosted LLM, vector databases, and RAG (Retrieval-Augmented Generation).

## 🚀 Quick Start (5 minutes)

### Prerequisites

- **Python 3.10+**
- **Ollama** (local LLM server) - [Download](https://ollama.ai)
- **Pinecone API Key** - [Free account](https://pinecone.io)

### Installation

1. **Clone/navigate to the project**:
```bash
cd /Users/ullasgowda/Documents/Diligent_PersonalAssistant
```

2. **Create a virtual environment** (optional but recommended):
```bash
python3 -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate  # On Windows: venv\Scripts\activate
```

3. **Install dependencies**:
```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

4. **Set environment variables**:

Create a `.env` file in the project root:
```bash
# Pinecone Configuration
PINECONE_API_KEY=your_pinecone_api_key_here

# Ollama Configuration (optional - defaults to localhost:11434)
OLLAMA_BASE_URL=http://localhost:11434
OLLAMA_MODEL=llama3
```

Or export directly:
```bash
export PINECONE_API_KEY="your_api_key"
export OLLAMA_BASE_URL="http://localhost:11434"
export OLLAMA_MODEL="llama3"
```

### Step 1: Start Ollama

Open a new terminal and run:
```bash
ollama pull llama3     # Download LLaMA 3 8B (first time only, ~4GB)
ollama serve           # Start the Ollama server
```

You should see:
```
Listening on 127.0.0.1:11434
```

### Step 2: Start FastAPI Backend

In another terminal:
```bash
cd /Users/ullasgowda/Documents/Diligent_PersonalAssistant/backend
python main.py
```

Or with auto-reload:
```bash
uvicorn main:app --reload --host 0.0.0.0 --port 8000
```

You should see:
```
✓ RAG engine initialized successfully
Uvicorn running on http://0.0.0.0:8000
```

Check health: http://localhost:8000/health

### Step 3: Index Sample Documents

In a third terminal:
```bash
cd /Users/ullasgowda/Documents/Diligent_PersonalAssistant/data
python init_data.py
```

You should see:
```
✓ Sample documents indexed successfully!
```

### Step 4: Start Streamlit UI

In a fourth terminal:
```bash
cd /Users/ullasgowda/Documents/Diligent_PersonalAssistant/frontend
streamlit run app.py
```

The app will open at: http://localhost:8501

---

## 📁 Project Structure

```
Diligent_PersonalAssistant/
├── backend/
│   ├── main.py              # FastAPI server + chat endpoint
│   ├── rag.py               # RAG orchestration logic
│   ├── vector_db.py         # Pinecone integration
│   ├── llm.py               # Ollama LLM wrapper
│   └── embeddings.py        # Text embedding generation
├── frontend/
│   └── app.py               # Streamlit chatbot UI
├── data/
│   └── init_data.py         # Sample document indexing script
├── requirements.txt         # Python dependencies
├── .env                     # Environment variables (create this)
└── README.md                # This file
```

---

## 🏗️ Architecture

### Data Flow
```
User Query (Streamlit)
    ↓
FastAPI /chat Endpoint
    ↓
Embed Query (sentence-transformers)
    ↓
Query Pinecone (Vector DB)
    ↓
Retrieve Top-5 Documents
    ↓
Build RAG Prompt (Context + Query)
    ↓
Send to Ollama (LLaMA 3 8B)
    ↓
Generate Response
    ↓
Return Answer + Sources (Streamlit)
```

### Key Components

| Component | Technology | Purpose |
|-----------|-----------|---------|
| **LLM** | LLaMA 3 8B (Ollama) | Local text generation, no API calls |
| **Embeddings** | sentence-transformers | Convert text to 384-dim vectors |
| **Vector DB** | Pinecone | Store embeddings, semantic search |
| **Backend** | FastAPI | REST API for chat and indexing |
| **Frontend** | Streamlit | Interactive web UI |

---

## 🔌 API Reference

### Health Check
```bash
curl http://localhost:8000/health
```

Response:
```json
{"status": "ok", "service": "Jarvis"}
```

### Chat Endpoint
```bash
curl -X POST http://localhost:8000/chat \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{"query": "What is RAG?", "top_k": 5}'
```

Request:
```json
{
  "query": "Your question here",
  "top_k": 5  // Optional: number of documents to retrieve
}
```

Response:
```json
{
  "answer": "RAG (Retrieval-Augmented Generation) combines...",
  "sources": [
    {
      "id": "doc_004",
      "text": "RAG fundamentals document..."
    }
  ],
  "context_count": 3
}
```

### Index Documents
```bash
curl -X POST http://localhost:8000/index \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "documents": [
      {
        "id": "doc_001",
        "text": "Your document content here",
        "source": "Wikipedia"
      }
    ]
  }'
```

---

## 🧠 How RAG Works

### Retrieval Phase
1. User asks a question
2. Question is converted to an embedding (384-dimensional vector)
3. Pinecone searches for semantically similar documents
4. Top-5 most relevant documents are retrieved

### Augmentation Phase
5. Retrieved documents are formatted as context
6. A prompt is constructed: `[System Instructions] + [Context] + [User Question]`

### Generation Phase
7. The prompt is sent to LLaMA 3 8B on Ollama
8. LLM generates an answer based on the context
9. Response is returned with source references

### Benefits
- **No hallucinations**: LLM only uses retrieved context
- **Transparency**: Sources are shown
- **Accuracy**: Factual information from knowledge base
- **Local**: All processing happens on your machine

---

## 🎯 Example Queries

Once the app is running, try these questions:

- "What is FastAPI and why is it useful?"
- "Explain RAG to me"
- "What can I use Python for?"
- "How does Ollama work?"
- "Describe embeddings"
- "Tell me about Streamlit"

---

## ⚙️ Configuration

### Model Selection

To use a different model instead of LLaMA 3:

```bash
# Download another model
ollama pull mistral      # Smaller, faster
ollama pull llama2       # Older but reliable

# Set environment variable
export OLLAMA_MODEL=mistral
```

Available models: https://ollama.ai/library

### Embedding Model

To use a different embedding model (in `backend/embeddings.py`):

```python
# Current: all-MiniLM-L6-v2 (384-dim, 22MB)
# Alternatives:
# - "all-mpnet-base-v2" (768-dim, larger but more accurate)
# - "paraphrase-MiniLM-L6-v2" (384-dim, good for paraphrases)

EMBEDDING_MODEL = SentenceTransformer("all-MiniLM-L6-v2")
```

### Pinecone Index

When creating your Pinecone index, use:
- **Dimension**: 384 (matches all-MiniLM-L6-v2)
- **Metric**: cosine

---

## 🚨 Troubleshooting

### "Cannot connect to Ollama"
- Check if Ollama server is running: `ollama serve`
- Verify OLLAMA_BASE_URL is correct
- Default: http://localhost:11434

### "PINECONE_API_KEY not found"
- Create `.env` file with your API key
- Or export the environment variable
- Get key from: https://pinecone.io

### "Backend error: 500"
- Check backend terminal for error message
- Ensure Ollama and Pinecone are accessible
- Verify all dependencies are installed: `pip install -r requirements.txt`

### "Streamlit app won't load"
- Kill the port: `lsof -ti:8501 | xargs kill -9` (macOS/Linux)
- Restart: `streamlit run frontend/app.py`

### "Document indexing fails"
- Ensure FastAPI backend is running
- Check Pinecone API key is valid
- Verify documents have `id`, `text`, and optional `source` fields

---

## 📦 Dependencies

| Package | Version | Purpose |
|---------|---------|---------|
| fastapi | 0.104.1 | Web API framework |
| uvicorn | 0.24.0 | ASGI server |
| pydantic | 2.5.0 | Data validation |
| requests | 2.31.0 | HTTP client |
| pinecone-client | 3.0.0 | Vector DB client |
| sentence-transformers | 2.2.2 | Embeddings |
| streamlit | 1.28.1 | UI framework |
| python-dotenv | 1.0.0 | Environment variables |

All are production-grade, stable libraries with active maintenance.

---

## 🎓 Key Design Decisions

| Decision | Rationale |
|----------|-----------|
| **LLaMA 3 8B** | Good balance of speed and quality; runs on consumer hardware |
| **Ollama** | Simplifies local LLM management; no Docker required |
| **sentence-transformers** | Lightweight, fast, excellent for semantic search |
| **all-MiniLM-L6-v2** | 384-dim, small footprint (22MB), good performance |
| **Pinecone** | Managed vector DB; handles scale gracefully |
| **FastAPI** | Modern, fast, automatic docs; perfect for RAG |
| **Streamlit** | Rapid UI development; great for demos |

---

## 🔒 Security Notes

- Store `PINECONE_API_KEY` in `.env`, never in git
- For production: use API rate limiting on FastAPI
- Validate all user inputs (already done in code)
- Run backend on trusted network only

---

## 📈 Next Steps (Not Included)

This is a minimal prototype. For production, consider:

- [ ] Authentication/authorization for FastAPI
- [ ] Persistent chat history (database)
- [ ] Document uploads and management UI
- [ ] User-specific knowledge bases
- [ ] Semantic caching for repeated queries
- [ ] Advanced RAG (multi-hop retrieval, reranking)
- [ ] Performance monitoring and metrics
- [ ] CI/CD pipeline for deployment

---

## 📄 License

This prototype is provided as-is for educational and development purposes.

---

## 🤝 Support

For issues or questions:
1. Check the Troubleshooting section above
2. Verify all services are running (Ollama, FastAPI, Pinecone)
3. Check logs in each terminal for detailed errors
4. Ensure `.env` has correct API keys

---

## ✨ What You've Built

A complete RAG system that:
- ✅ Runs entirely locally (no cloud LLM needed)
- ✅ Retrieves relevant context accurately
- ✅ Generates grounded, accurate responses
- ✅ Shows source documents for transparency
- ✅ Has a clean, user-friendly UI
- ✅ Is production-ready with proper error handling
- ✅ Uses stable, well-documented libraries
- ✅ Can be deployed and scaled

Congratulations! 🎉

Commit message:

Update README by removing unnecessary sections
Removed next steps and built features sections from README.

README.md, after:

# Jarvis - Personal AI Assistant

A minimal, production-ready personal AI assistant built with self-hosted LLM, vector databases, and RAG (Retrieval-Augmented Generation).

## 🚀 Quick Start (5 minutes)

### Prerequisites

- **Python 3.10+**
- **Ollama** (local LLM server) - [Download](https://ollama.ai)
- **Pinecone API Key** - [Free account](https://pinecone.io)

### Installation

1. **Clone/navigate to the project**:
```bash
cd /Users/ullasgowda/Documents/Diligent_PersonalAssistant
```

2. **Create a virtual environment** (optional but recommended):
```bash
python3 -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate  # On Windows: venv\Scripts\activate
```

3. **Install dependencies**:
```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

4. **Set environment variables**:

Create a `.env` file in the project root:
```bash
# Pinecone Configuration
PINECONE_API_KEY=your_pinecone_api_key_here

# Ollama Configuration (optional - defaults to localhost:11434)
OLLAMA_BASE_URL=http://localhost:11434
OLLAMA_MODEL=llama3
```

Or export directly:
```bash
export PINECONE_API_KEY="your_api_key"
export OLLAMA_BASE_URL="http://localhost:11434"
export OLLAMA_MODEL="llama3"
```

### Step 1: Start Ollama

Open a new terminal and run:
```bash
ollama pull llama3     # Download LLaMA 3 8B (first time only, ~4GB)
ollama serve           # Start the Ollama server
```

You should see:
```
Listening on 127.0.0.1:11434
```

### Step 2: Start FastAPI Backend

In another terminal:
```bash
cd /Users/ullasgowda/Documents/Diligent_PersonalAssistant/backend
python main.py
```

Or with auto-reload:
```bash
uvicorn main:app --reload --host 0.0.0.0 --port 8000
```

You should see:
```
✓ RAG engine initialized successfully
Uvicorn running on http://0.0.0.0:8000
```

Check health: http://localhost:8000/health

### Step 3: Index Sample Documents

In a third terminal:
```bash
cd /Users/ullasgowda/Documents/Diligent_PersonalAssistant/data
python init_data.py
```

You should see:
```
✓ Sample documents indexed successfully!
```

### Step 4: Start Streamlit UI

In a fourth terminal:
```bash
cd /Users/ullasgowda/Documents/Diligent_PersonalAssistant/frontend
streamlit run app.py
```

The app will open at: http://localhost:8501

---

## 📁 Project Structure

```
Diligent_PersonalAssistant/
├── backend/
│   ├── main.py              # FastAPI server + chat endpoint
│   ├── rag.py               # RAG orchestration logic
│   ├── vector_db.py         # Pinecone integration
│   ├── llm.py               # Ollama LLM wrapper
│   └── embeddings.py        # Text embedding generation
├── frontend/
│   └── app.py               # Streamlit chatbot UI
├── data/
│   └── init_data.py         # Sample document indexing script
├── requirements.txt         # Python dependencies
├── .env                     # Environment variables (create this)
└── README.md                # This file
```

---

## 🏗️ Architecture

### Data Flow
```
User Query (Streamlit)
    ↓
FastAPI /chat Endpoint
    ↓
Embed Query (sentence-transformers)
    ↓
Query Pinecone (Vector DB)
    ↓
Retrieve Top-5 Documents
    ↓
Build RAG Prompt (Context + Query)
    ↓
Send to Ollama (LLaMA 3 8B)
    ↓
Generate Response
    ↓
Return Answer + Sources (Streamlit)
```

### Key Components

| Component | Technology | Purpose |
|-----------|-----------|---------|
| **LLM** | LLaMA 3 8B (Ollama) | Local text generation, no API calls |
| **Embeddings** | sentence-transformers | Convert text to 384-dim vectors |
| **Vector DB** | Pinecone | Store embeddings, semantic search |
| **Backend** | FastAPI | REST API for chat and indexing |
| **Frontend** | Streamlit | Interactive web UI |

---

## 🔌 API Reference

### Health Check
```bash
curl http://localhost:8000/health
```

Response:
```json
{"status": "ok", "service": "Jarvis"}
```

### Chat Endpoint
```bash
curl -X POST http://localhost:8000/chat \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{"query": "What is RAG?", "top_k": 5}'
```

Request:
```json
{
  "query": "Your question here",
  "top_k": 5  // Optional: number of documents to retrieve
}
```

Response:
```json
{
  "answer": "RAG (Retrieval-Augmented Generation) combines...",
  "sources": [
    {
      "id": "doc_004",
      "text": "RAG fundamentals document..."
    }
  ],
  "context_count": 3
}
```

### Index Documents
```bash
curl -X POST http://localhost:8000/index \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "documents": [
      {
        "id": "doc_001",
        "text": "Your document content here",
        "source": "Wikipedia"
      }
    ]
  }'
```

---

## 🧠 How RAG Works

### Retrieval Phase
1. User asks a question
2. Question is converted to an embedding (384-dimensional vector)
3. Pinecone searches for semantically similar documents
4. Top-5 most relevant documents are retrieved

### Augmentation Phase
5. Retrieved documents are formatted as context
6. A prompt is constructed: `[System Instructions] + [Context] + [User Question]`

### Generation Phase
7. The prompt is sent to LLaMA 3 8B on Ollama
8. LLM generates an answer based on the context
9. Response is returned with source references

### Benefits
- **No hallucinations**: LLM only uses retrieved context
- **Transparency**: Sources are shown
- **Accuracy**: Factual information from knowledge base
- **Local**: All processing happens on your machine

---

## 🎯 Example Queries

Once the app is running, try these questions:

- "What is FastAPI and why is it useful?"
- "Explain RAG to me"
- "What can I use Python for?"
- "How does Ollama work?"
- "Describe embeddings"
- "Tell me about Streamlit"

---

## ⚙️ Configuration

### Model Selection

To use a different model instead of LLaMA 3:

```bash
# Download another model
ollama pull mistral      # Smaller, faster
ollama pull llama2       # Older but reliable

# Set environment variable
export OLLAMA_MODEL=mistral
```

Available models: https://ollama.ai/library

### Embedding Model

To use a different embedding model (in `backend/embeddings.py`):

```python
# Current: all-MiniLM-L6-v2 (384-dim, 22MB)
# Alternatives:
# - "all-mpnet-base-v2" (768-dim, larger but more accurate)
# - "paraphrase-MiniLM-L6-v2" (384-dim, good for paraphrases)

EMBEDDING_MODEL = SentenceTransformer("all-MiniLM-L6-v2")
```

### Pinecone Index

When creating your Pinecone index, use:
- **Dimension**: 384 (matches all-MiniLM-L6-v2)
- **Metric**: cosine

---

## 🚨 Troubleshooting

### "Cannot connect to Ollama"
- Check if Ollama server is running: `ollama serve`
- Verify OLLAMA_BASE_URL is correct
- Default: http://localhost:11434

### "PINECONE_API_KEY not found"
- Create `.env` file with your API key
- Or export the environment variable
- Get key from: https://pinecone.io

### "Backend error: 500"
- Check backend terminal for error message
- Ensure Ollama and Pinecone are accessible
- Verify all dependencies are installed: `pip install -r requirements.txt`

### "Streamlit app won't load"
- Kill the port: `lsof -ti:8501 | xargs kill -9` (macOS/Linux)
- Restart: `streamlit run frontend/app.py`

### "Document indexing fails"
- Ensure FastAPI backend is running
- Check Pinecone API key is valid
- Verify documents have `id`, `text`, and optional `source` fields

---

## 📦 Dependencies

| Package | Version | Purpose |
|---------|---------|---------|
| fastapi | 0.104.1 | Web API framework |
| uvicorn | 0.24.0 | ASGI server |
| pydantic | 2.5.0 | Data validation |
| requests | 2.31.0 | HTTP client |
| pinecone-client | 3.0.0 | Vector DB client |
| sentence-transformers | 2.2.2 | Embeddings |
| streamlit | 1.28.1 | UI framework |
| python-dotenv | 1.0.0 | Environment variables |

All are production-grade, stable libraries with active maintenance.

---

## 🎓 Key Design Decisions

| Decision | Rationale |
|----------|-----------|
| **LLaMA 3 8B** | Good balance of speed and quality; runs on consumer hardware |
| **Ollama** | Simplifies local LLM management; no Docker required |
| **sentence-transformers** | Lightweight, fast, excellent for semantic search |
| **all-MiniLM-L6-v2** | 384-dim, small footprint (22MB), good performance |
| **Pinecone** | Managed vector DB; handles scale gracefully |
| **FastAPI** | Modern, fast, automatic docs; perfect for RAG |
| **Streamlit** | Rapid UI development; great for demos |

---

## 🔒 Security Notes

- Store `PINECONE_API_KEY` in `.env`, never in git
- For production: use API rate limiting on FastAPI
- Validate all user inputs (already done in code)
- Run backend on trusted network only

---



## 📄 License

This prototype is provided as-is for educational and development purposes.

---

## 🤝 Support

For issues or questions:
1. Check the Troubleshooting section above
2. Verify all services are running (Ollama, FastAPI, Pinecone)
3. Check logs in each terminal for detailed errors
4. Ensure `.env` has correct API keys

---


For the convinience of the tester,the api key of pinecone has been exposed in the .env file of the code
